Vault integration for ssh access [Proposal] (#6971)
kubermatic/kubermatic: docs/proposals/secret-manager-store-api.md

# Secrets Manager Store Proposal

**Author**: Emmanuel Bakare (@emmanuel-kubermatic)

**Status**: Draft proposal; prototype in progress.

## Goals
The proposed fix for the issue [6671](https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/issues/6671) 

- Adds support for vault related read access within the kubermatic source
- Polling support for SSH and Secrets within the Kubermatic source
- Revocation and TTL-based access for SSH

## Non-Goals
Adds support for vault access and a central store for accessing data

## Motivation and Background

Currently, there's a user ssh agent which manages credentials via fsnotify events and kubernetes secrets.

This approach is great but adds a limitation where the end user has to manually copy credentials to ssh secrets or add them via the API.

> The new approach documented within this proposal adds the ability to hard-code authorized keys but rather, add another option to lease out ssh certificates via vault which can be used to access the necessary clusters.

Reviewer: Actually, the solution is not strictly coupled with Vault. We could just mention that we will add support for [TrustedUserCAKeys](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/6/html/deployment_guide/sec-distributing_and_trusting_ssh_ca_public_keys), it's not something Vault specific, even if Vault provides a convenient way of storing CA cert and signing keys:
https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/ssh/signed-ssh-certificates

Author: I've updated that in the proposal

This is possible via signed certificates which can be provided via vault with a lease time configurable by the user.

## Implementation

[Signed SSH Certificates](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/ssh/signed-ssh-certificates) would be used to implement this.

Once provided, the configuration along with Vault access credentials (Vault address and token with access to that entry) would be used to create the desired token and access the cluster as needed.

Since the signing public key is to be replicated across multiple instances, we'd apply the same approach used previously for the SSH keys.

The keys would be updated but an update to the SSHd config. 

```text
.../etc/ssh/sshd_config
TrustedUserCAKeys /etc/ssh/trusted-user-ca-keys.pem

# Needed for OpenSSH Server 8.1 and older, ssh-rsa is removed from the default supported CA algorithms
CASignatureAlgorithms ecdsa-sha2-nistp256,ecdsa-sha2-nistp384,ecdsa-sha2-nistp521,ssh-ed25519,rsa-sha2-512,rsa-sha2-256,ssh-rsa

> ```

Reviewer: I think it's quite important to clarify how do we intend to configure the SSH daemon on the workers e.g. using user data scripts and cloud-init directives through machine-controller.

Author: Done.

> Only the master-controller-manager would have access to the Vault instance deployed either within or outside the cluster and a PATH entry to the desired secret engine would be used to fetch it.

Reviewer: I think that in the first instance we could even consider providing the public CA certificate with a secret to the master/seed cluster, this way we don't need any integration with vault, and we could do that in a second iteration. WDYT?

Author: That could pose a risk if the keys aren't changed.

Better for them to provide their own keys from the start to avoid security concerns

> Once fetched, it would be used to create a [UserSSHKey](https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/pkg/crd/kubermatic/v1/sshkeys.go) CRD along with the list of clusters it should be synced to and from there, replicated as needed.

Reviewer: Don't think we should create a `UserSSHKey` to distribute the public CA key.

Author: That was the previous approach

I've updated that now with the process you did provide

During a revocation / rotation, the same process would be applied, and the previous CRD updated and replicated as before.

## Alternatives considered

No alternatives as this process solves all desired requirements.

## Task & effort:
*Specify the tasks and the effort in days (samples unit 0.5days) e.g.*
* Implement Store Interface - 0.1d
* Write Store APIs for Kubernetes Secrets Store - 1d

> * Implement Vault integration APIs (Using the agent injector might have limitations) - 2d

Reviewer: I think those are not up-to-date

Author: They're not

I've  updated it now

# Secrets Store Proposal

**Author**: Emmanuel Bakare (@emmanuel-kubermatic)

**Status**: Draft proposal; prototype in progress.

## Goals
The proposed fix for the issue [6671](https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/issues/6671) 

- Define secret using Vault signed certificates to assist with SSH access

## Non-Goals

## Motivation and Background

> A kubermatic user can assign ssh keys to clusters at creation time via the machine controller through cloud-init, but the user ssh agent also assists with updating the keys at runtime via the usersshkeys secret.

Reviewer 2: `The keys are updated mainly via the UserSSHKeys object in the master cluster, so not directly on the secrets. Once the list is updated in the master, users then can attach keys to user clusters which would then create secrets that have the keys in their data field. Then those secrets are read from the seed by a user ssh key agent that would always rewrite the ssh keys on each UserSSHKey update.`

This explains it a bit more, because the real canonical truth is always coming from the UserSSHKeys in the master. Would say to formulate the text above in your style and add it here.

Author: Done

> This approach is great but adds a limitation where the end user has to manually copy credentials to ssh secrets or add them via the API.

Reviewer: Actually, the current flow is the following:

1. KKP users add secret with KKP UI or API, and [UserSSHKey](https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/blob/9f2af8e327595efbe90b96fd8f44bd51dcafa7ff/pkg/crd/kubermatic/v1/sshkeys.go#L31-L50) get created on the master cluster
2. [master-controller-manager ensures](https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/blob/9f2af8e327595efbe90b96fd8f44bd51dcafa7ff/pkg/controller/master-controller-manager/usersshkeyssynchronizer/controller.go#L199-L206) that secrets containing the certificates are present in the corresponding seed clusters.
3. [user-cluster-controller-manager](https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/blob/9f2af8e327595efbe90b96fd8f44bd51dcafa7ff/pkg/controller/user-cluster-controller-manager/resources/reconciler.go#L69) sync those secrets from seed to user clusters
4. The agents running on each worker [fetch](https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/blob/9f2af8e327595efbe90b96fd8f44bd51dcafa7ff/pkg/controller/usersshkeysagent/usersshkeys_controller.go#L154-L166) the certs from the secret and update the authorized keys.

The key thing to decide to me is at which stage do where do we want to integrate Vault.

Author: I've seen that we do not need access via the master-controller-manager for now as we discussed.

Editing the cloud-init configuration is also not needed as we can create the file via a hostPath mount which would then use the VaultSecret named `vaultsignedca` to create a TrustedCA file in the `/etc/ssh` directory.

I have an idea that we can likewise overwrite the configuration via a secret mount instead of cloud-init?

I'd update that in the proposal when we resolve the ideas around this

> The new approach documented within this proposal supports the ability to hard-code authorized keys but rather, alongside another option to trust SSH CA public keys.

Reviewer: I think this should be:
```suggestion
The new approach documented within this proposal provides the ability to use [SSH CA certificates](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/ssh/signed-ssh-certificates), avoiding the burden of copying each user key individually.
```

1. Duplicate credentials across their environments.
2. We can have other secret managers in the future asides Vault 

The approach is to simplify the use / integration of separate secret manager APIs through easy interfaces.

Also, there could be more than 1 secrets manager in the future
e.g AWS Secrets Manager, Google Secret Manager etc

## Implementation

Define structs and interfaces for other secret managers

we would have interfaces like such

```go
package sm

type Store interface {
    write() error
    read(key string) error
    init(config interface{}) error
}

type K8SSecretStore struct{
	Store
	// other configs
}
```

> The approach would this can affect the way we reconcile secrets, even  on Kubernetes as API access to the secrets store could be modified to use those interfaces.

Reviewer: Similar to my previous comment, where do we want to introduce this abstraction? It's not really clear to me.

> A similar approach can be used already in here [user-ssh-agent](./pkg/controller/usersshkeysagent/usersshkeys_controller.go).

Reviewer: Nit: link is broken.

Author: I've removed it since we no longer interface with the user ssh agent

> The keys would be updated but would require an update to the SSHd config written by the machine-controller on cluster creation. 

Reviewer: To make things clearer, I would say that the machine controller will make sure of setting up the SSHd configuration and provisioning the initial public certificate, and it will be possible to rotate the certificate by using the ssh-agent.

Author: Done

> Only the master-controller-manager would write these configurations.

Reviewer: Not sure to understand your point here.

Author: I've removed that part and changed some of the wordings based on your previous comment here: https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/pull/6971#discussion_r638807366

> The machine controller would create the CA pem file and configure the SSH daemon to add the `TrustedCAKeys` configuration, provided the CA key is specified on cluster creation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The machine controller would create the CA pem file and configure the SSH daemon to add the `TrustedCAKeys` configuration, the provided CA key is specified on cluster creation.
```

> Distribution of the keys is out of scope from the master to user controller, the secret for the CA would be created on the cluster.

Reviewer: The problem with this approach is that if the secret is created after cluster creation, the initial machine deployment will be created without CA cert enabled, isn't it?

Author: I've stated that in the proposal

> Since the updates to use a TrustedCA require we update the SSH configuration and restart the SSH daemon, this would not be possible if the cluster is already created without the configuration.

Reviewer 2: `Since the updates to use a TrustedCA require ` could be formulated in a better way?

Author: Updated this yesterday

> # Secrets Store Proposal

Reviewer: The title and the filename don't seem to be relevant any longer, could you please align with the actual content of the proposal?

Author: Done

This includes the following process
 - Generating a CA key pair 
 - Configure the SSH daemon to trust the public key via TrustedUserCAKeys configuration, example:
    ```text
    .../etc/ssh/sshd_config
    TrustedUserCAKeys /etc/ssh/trusted-user-ca-keys.pem
    
    # Needed for OpenSSH Server 8.1 and older, ssh-rsa is removed from the default supported CA algorithms
    CASignatureAlgorithms ecdsa-sha2-nistp256,ecdsa-sha2-nistp384,ecdsa-sha2-nistp521,ssh-ed25519,rsa-sha2-512,rsa-sha2-256,ssh-rsa
    ```
 - Starts the SSH daemon with the above configuration on the cluster to use only keys signed by the stated TrustedCA.
 - Distribute the public key to the workers upon further updates with the help of the `user-ssh-agent`.

> NOTE: This allows the rollout of new CA key pairs for security reasons e.g rotation, revocation etc
> Management of the CA keys are the responsibility of the admin managing the KKP cluster.

The machine controller would create the CA pem file and configure the SSH daemon to add the `TrustedCAKeys` configuration, the provided CA key is specified on cluster creation.

> Distribution of the keys is out of scope from the master to user controller, the secret for the CA would be created on the cluster. The reason for this is to remove the issues around the secret being created after cluster creation.

Reviewer: The problem to me is that we should be able to provide the public certificate at cluster creation time as the initial machinedeployment should contain it.

> the secret for the CA would be created on the cluster

I'm not sure I understand which cluster you are referring to. If we can skip the distribution of the public keys to start simple it's fine, but take into account that we still need to configure the machines to trust the CA public key so we need it somehow when the md is deployed, isn't it?

This is the controller we use to deployment: https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/blob/9ade0be3abcf1aa63086a533bd232c5d317060ed/pkg/controller/seed-controller-manager/initialmachinedeployment/controller.go#L126

Reviewer 2: @irozzo-1A What about leveraging the user ssh key that we create in the user cluster, by adding a new field which contains the the public key? thus the machine creation wouldn't be dependent anymore on the cloud-init propagation. Once the public key is available in the secret, the agent will inject to the machines afterwards in async fashion.

Author: This has been done in the implementation

https://github.com/kubermatic/kubermatic/pull/7092

Reviewer: @moadqassem problem is that sshd has to be re-configured and restarted, it's not just a matter of dropping the public key somewhere in the fs. The ssh-agent will be used to rotate the public key, but for the initial setup, the cloud-init seems to be more appropriate.
